---
layout: post
title: Jam 2013 Round 1B
---

As ever, links to: [Official Contest Analysis](https://code.google.com/codejam/contest/2434486/dashboard#s=a) and my code on [GitHub](https://github.com/MatthewDaws/CodeJam/tree/master/2013_1b).

I did this under timed conditions, and would have just qualified.  A silly error was all which stood between B large and me...

**Problem A, Osmos:** Start with A and \\( (x\_i)_{i=1}^N \\) integers.  You can absorb one of the \\( x_i \\) if it's smaller than A, and then A grows by \\( x_i \\).  Help Armin to be able to absorb all the numbers by adjusting the initial set:

   - You can add any new number;
   - You can remove a number.

What is the least number of moves to get a valid set?

<!--more-->

   - Order so that \\( x_1 \leq x_2 \leq \cdots \leq x_N \\) as optimal case is to absorb from small to large.
   - If Armin is trying to absorb \\( x_i \\) but can't then A is too small, so add in a new number \\( A-1 \\).  Maybe repeat this step a few times.
   - Now consider removing numbers: it only makes sense to remove the largest number (if you can't deal with a smaller number, then removing it just makes the next larger number ever harder to deal with!)
   - So compare removing the last `k` terms with how many "additions" these `k` would take up, and find the smallest overall number of moves.
   - My code actually checked if there was any k whereby removing k terms was better, removed them, and then iterated.  I now don't see why this works...
   - Corner case: if A=1 initially, Armin can never absorb anything, and the optimal solution is just to remove all numbers.


**Problem B, Falling Diamonds:** The diamonds form this sort of triangular pattern:

    *      *           *              - 
          * *         * *            - -
         * * *       * * *          * * -
                    * * * *        * * * -
                   * * * * *      * * * * *

The final picture shows one possible "half-way" point, with `-` marking slots to be filled in future.  Each new diamond takes a 50/50 split at the top, and falls down one side.

   - So test if the coordinates X Y can ever be the centre of a diamond.
   - Work out which "layer" the Nth diamond will fall in.  If X Y are in the a previous layer, the probability is 1.0; if X Y is in the next layer, it is 0.0
   - Otherwise, we have to work out or simulate the probability.  Consider [a b] to indicate that the left pile contains a diamonds, the right b diamonds.  With n = 0, 2, 4, 6, ... the layer height, then the transition probabilities are:
      - If a, b <= n then 50/50 chance of going to either [a+1 b] or [a b+1]
      - If a==n then move to [a b+1], and if b==n then move to [a+1 b]
   - A little paper analysis shows that you get a variant of Pascal's triangle (where later rows are "truncated").  Alternatively, just naively compute the probabilities, which is what I did.  (Stupid mistake was not to notice that there are in general 2 ways to get to [a b] on the next step, so a dictionary is a better data structure than a list...)


**Problem C, Garbled Email:**  I initially tried a DFS with pruning (aka backtracking) algorithm.  This worked, but was too slow, even for the small case.  So I cheated, and my Python code is just an implementation of the suggested route (elements of which you can see in my initial attempt!) which is a Dynamic Programming solution combined with cunning precalculation.  (Don't walk the dictionary, but rather look up in it!)
