---
layout: post
title: Code Jam 2014 Qualification
---

While on holiday, what better way to unwind than solve some old Code Jam puzzles?

As ever, the [Official Analysis](https://code.google.com/codejam/contest/2974486/dashboard#s=a) is very good, and similar to my approaches.  Some code on [GitHub](https://github.com/MatthewDaws/CodeJam/tree/master/2014_qual).

<!--more-->

**Problem A:** Trivial.

**Problem B:** The official writeup draws some graphs, but you can argue quite algebraically.

   - Once you have C cookies, it doesn't make sense to delay upgrading.
   - So the optimal strategy is to keep getting to C cookies, upgrade, and then eventually decide to stop and just generate the needed X cookies.
   - What to stop?
   - If you stop after n=0,1,2,... upgrades then the time taken is
\\[ T_n = \frac{C}{2} + \frac{C}{2+F} + \frac{C}{2+2F} + \cdots + \frac{C}{C+(n-1)F} + \frac{X}{2+nF} \\]
Then we can check that \\( T_{n+1} < T_n \\) if and only if \\( n+1 < \frac{X}{C} - \frac{2}{F} \\).  It follows from this if and only if that the sequence \\( (T\_n) \\) will decrease, bottom out, and then forever increase.  So \\( T_N \\) is minimal if \\( N \\) is maximal with \\( N < \frac{X}{C} - \frac{2}{F} \\) or equivalently \\( N = \lceil \frac{X}{C} - \frac{2}{F} \rceil - 1 \\).
   - So we simply compute \\( T_N \\) for this value; I went to the effort of summing from the least to greatest values to reduce round-off errors.

**Problem C:** Just draw a lot of pictures!

**Problem D:** I worked out Ken's optimal strategy, and it seemed intuitively clear that Naomi couldn't change this, but I couldn't find a formal proof (the official writeup has a very nice one).  The optimal strategy in Deceitful War is also reasonably clear, once you draw a few arrangements of weights.
