---
layout: post
title: Java Enum definition
---

At the dying ends of the work day, I came across [this page](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/lang/Enum.html) and was initially confused by

    public abstract class Enum<E extends Enum<E>>

Doesn't that look, well, horribly circular?  [Stackoverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3061759/why-in-java-enum-is-declared-as-enume-extends-enume) [suggests](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/211143/java-enum-definition) this is common confusion.

<!--more-->

Circularity is nothing to be afraid of: consider the type constraint `<T extends Comparable<T>>` which simply means (slightly loosely speaking) that T must implement `compareTo(T o)`.  You have to be able to compare to yourself.

So what does `Enum<E extends Enum<E>>` mean?  Simply that we can only use `Enum<E>` for types `E` which extends `Enum<E>`, i.e. fulfil the contract guaranteed by `Enum<E>`.  To my mind, this _is slightly_ circular, as when checking the definition of `Enum` the compiler may need to decide if `E` can do something, for which it needs to know the definition `Enum<E>`.

The answer by [Maurice Naftalin](http://stackoverflow.com/a/758595/3403507) explains why we want this rather well.  We want

    public class MyEnum extends ...
    
where "..." is something to do with the generic `Enum`, and we want this to implement `Comparable<MyEnum>` automatically for us.  What can we paramaterise `Enum` with?  Well, we only have `MyEnum` so it better be (in fact, only can be) `Enum<MyEnum>`.  Thus we need

    MyEnum extends Enum<MyEnum>
    Enum<MyEnum> implements Comparable<MyEnum>

Abstracting, we find that the constraint on `E` in `Enum<E>` is simply that `E extends Enum<E>`.  That is, we arrive at the seemingly odd constraint completely naturally.

An Enum keeps an "ordinal", or what I'll call `place` below, to allow ordering.  So, we want something like this:

    public abstract class Thing<E extends Thing<E>>
        implements Comparable<E>
    {
        private int place;
        public final int compareTo(E other) {
            return this.place - other.place;
        }
    }

(Note that this is bad practice: I'm assuming `place` is small so over/underflows can't occur in the `compareTo` method).  We know that `E extends Thing<E>` and so `other` fulfils the contract of `Thing` and hence has a field named `place` of type `int`.  In this case, we could parameterise on `<E extends Thing<?>>` but for `Enum` we probably want the strong typing to ensure we don't compare two different Enum types.

More at [Generics FAQ](http://www.angelikalanger.com/GenericsFAQ/FAQSections/TypeParameters.html#FAQ106).

In C++, there is the related [CRTP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curiously_recurring_template_pattern) of which more to come...